2024-10-08

1. (*) does mean dead. We also only use it for things that died the year before, 
not recently dead growth from that year (which can be distinguished by color: 
tan instead of grey usually). 
If to cumbersome, those can either be removed or aggregated into dead veg. 
Can you do that easily, or would you like me to do that?

2. For plant community we really are interested in 
A. all (common) species. 
B. But there are two target weeds we are trying to control 
summer mustard, Hirschfeldia incana, HIIN, and 
yellow star thistle, Centuarea solstitialis, CESO. 

We also seeded some native wildfowers: poppies, ESCA; tarweed, DELO; 
owls clover, CAEX; and goldfields, LAGR

3. I do have a key for the species. Native grass, native forb, non-native grass, 
non-native forb are the most important functional groups, 
though you could add annual/perennial in. I do have a list (attached)

4. Often in NMS less common species are removed. 
In the past I have removed species not present in a minimum number of plots (like 3, 5, or7) 
and sometimes not hitting enough cover. 
If it was only in 1 or 2 plots with 1 percent cover it isn’t going to tell us anything.

5. Probably 6 months Oct-March rainfall. I couldn’t easily grab good data 
for that period from our data station, but I could with a little digging.

6. In the first position: 
G=full grazing,
S= no grazing in winter, spring only (aka seasonal), 
U= not grazed. 
In the second position: 
C=control, 
S= seeded, 
M=mowed (in the ungrazed plots, only), 
MS= mowed and seeded (in the ungrazed plots, only). 
Sorry about the confusing double meaning for “S”


##Data description:
Our 4 years of plant community data are in a file in our google drive folder:

I created an excel file that has tabes with our plant community data and with our soil data. 
We only sampled our soil data one year and we only sampled by plot (G,S,U) not subplot. 
I created another file that is just for one year (rather than copied to have the same data for each year).

 XLXS:
Plant Comm and Soil
CSV versions of:
Plant Comm (Wide 2)
Soil 2023

If possible, could you run an NMS on the plant community by treatment and year? 
Does it make any sense to run it with the soil as factors as well? Water Capacity (mid range value), 
Organic Matter, CN ratio might be good things to include. I didn’t bother to add rainfall since 
it is the same across the site for each year, but perhaps I could add that (though I also couldn’t 
find a total for PINN in a quick search since they only update totals online every couple years).

 

Take a look at the data if you have a moment and give me feedback on if there is some further work you would like me 
to do to put it into a format for easy analysis.


2024-11-24
Next steps:
1. Amelia sent new lookup table
2. join lookup table to the wide ord data
3. Group the species by native and Non-native annuals
  = group byt the FxlGrps from Amelia
  = Lump and separate the 4 seeded natives vs all other Native annual forbs (NAF)
  = HIIN and CESO separate as well lump or split 
  
  
4. Only UNGRAZED has the subtreatments.  
  a. Do interactions for trt and subtrt.
  
  
4. Main interest is mowing as a 4th treatment to consider (not really a subtreatmnet).

  
2024-11-25
1. look into more NMS dimensions.
2. Look into incorporating pre treatment year 2021.
3. TODO: Take a look at the summer mustard analysis same plots but different time of year.
  A. canopy cover response
  B. effect of year, treatment and subtreatment on cover.
4. 



2025-03-10
Devii, Leslie Roche, Amelia, Elizabeth Reikowski (Rancher)
1. include baseline year.
2. set ungrazed to baseline

-

2025-03-17

1. Remove all mowed and mowed seeded (done, also do for GLLVM)
2. add in rainfall that Amelia Sent (water Year?)
  a. Spring total Feb-March  rainfall?  (sampling in April)
  b. or use SPEI to include evapotranspiration?
      source for SPEI?  (Leslie will ask for source,  also R package source)
3. Amelia's Chorizanthe analysis - followed rainfall for 3 month time chunks.
    November and April key months in previous studies
4. rerun the GLLVM with the filter in 1 above
5. Redo the mustard data in the same framework
            Is there no Pre data for mustard?


2025-03-26
1. Review above
2. What about soil?


1. what is the analysis question for the mustard data?
2. what are the response variables:
  multivariate analysis
  
3. Analysis questions
  A. mustard cover
  B. thatch
  C. Visual obstruction (revelle) (also wildlife related)
  D. Veg height (just for validation, and perhaps seeding impact?)
    i. or heterogeneity?  Habitat structure for birds...look up methods.
    ii. CV of height?
    iii. functional height diversity. shannon index modified for height by classes from visual obstruction data.


COMMUNITY DATA SET (pct cover all species)
TARGET (finer) Scale Data SET (details on target)


4. Stated goals (note updates 2025-04-28):
  A. Does grazing reduce thatch and create more bare ground?  ()                           COMM RESULTS -->   (2b_GLLVM.R)
  B. Does Grazing reduce summer mustard? (Cover here) (Density data pending from AR)       COMM RESULTS -->   (2b_GLLVM.R)
  C. Does grazing enhance seeding success?  (cover here, pending density data, from AR)    COMM RESULTS -->   (2b_GLLVM.R)
  D. Does Grazing enhance habitat for grassland birds and ground squirrels?  (Amelia has the data)
    This is from different sampling method to get more accuracy/finer scale sampling !
    i. visual obstruction and/or (Revelle data pending from Amelia)
            TARGET (FINE SCALE) DATA SET
            sum mustard cover
            veg height
            visual obstruction average
            thatch 
            bare ground
            density of target species (2 weeds and 4 seeds)
    ii. height diversity (skip for now)
  E. How do treatments impact community composition?                              COMM RESULTS -->   (2a_ordination.R)
  
5. continue to set mowing data aside
6. Visualization
  A. Spider plots example: 
    https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0166595

7. Plot out the soil type info.

NMS in good format - clean up


2025-04-30
1. clean up NMS, GLLVM and GLMERs
2. confirm target data with amela
3. fix the naming convetions for groupings!
    seed, mow,
4. add in 2025 Visual obstruction
5. analyze production data.  do both types and compare. focus on the AllYield !!
6. 
codes for species groups:
The three leeter codes are a concatenation of 3 columns "native?", "duration ", "lifeform" . 
Native?: yes=native,  n= non native, x= not applicable.; 
duration: A=annual,  P= perennial, x= not applicable; 
life form: f= forb ( wildflower), g= gramminoid ( grass), x= not applicable



2025-07-10:
Hi Ben,
Here is the validated plant community data from the Pinnacles Bottomlands, 2025, 
and an updated precip table.  I have updated the file called targetfinescaldata 
with all the other different measurements to date, but we are awaiting this years 
Mustard cover, which we will collect shortly and will be very quick to enter.
I can send the file to you if you want to look at it, 
but otherwise I will send it a couple days before our next meeting, 
at which point it should be complete. Here are the headers from that dataset:




-------------------
2025-07-24
1. combined 2025 community data into Wide_3 to create wide 4 qaqc.
there were about 15 additional species colums in the 2025 data, so that was removed...
    most were all zeros or just 1 hit

2. Don't have enough info to add the 2025 data to the finescaledata.....  
missing fields and rows...looks like the plot data is the new 80 samples, but measured data
are for all years with no ID info.    Seems like different parameters measured in the 2021-2024 
vs 2025 data.



3. Check with Amelia the native AG -- shouldn't be any but show up in the Wide_6.FxlGrp file...
    2025-08-04 AMELIA SENDING BB UPDATED qaqc 3 file.

4. remove DEADSUM, XXX, and BAREGROUND from NMS plot and analyses.  just discuss in text.

5. Lag effects of rainfall?
  a. build into a bayesian model for univariate cover of target species
  
6. BB check recent email for the overarching questions...
a. what are the "wildlife habitat"" metrics:   some bareground, reduced thatch 
        (grassland birds, tiger salamanders, etc. )
7. rename "seeded" to "scraped and seeded"


2025-08-04
1. Refer to amelia's notes file for definitions:

TARGET FINE SCALE DATA
Year
Block 
Plot
Subplot
VisObs_Av : Number of 10cm segmentsw/25% cover - Robel Pole
AllYieldEstEst_lbsAc : Rated 1-5 within plots and compared to regression of dry mass of samples in same area same time same rating scale
Thatch_lbsAc : estmates from 3x 10cm plots
AvVegHeight_cm: Average height in cm of tallest vegetation in 15 cm radius collected every 40cm
AvThatch_cm :Average depth of thatch (dead, detached biomass on soil surface) collected every 40 cm
BG_pct : percent of sampled points (sum/60) with no plants recorded
MustardCovr_pct : percent canopy cover of non-native mustard target weed
MustardDens_m2 : average density of non-native target weed mustard
PoppyDens_m2 : average density of native seeded California poppy
YStarDens_m2 : average density of non-native target weed yellow starthistle
GoldfieldDens_m2 : average density of native seeded Southern goldfields
OwlsClvDens_m2 : average density of native seeded purple owls clover
TarweedDens_m2 : average density of native seeded three-ray tarweed

2. 
A. Pool the density measurements?  Pool Mustard and YST? (mustard high density)
B. Pool the seeded in panels together?  (goldfields order of magnitude higher)

3. AR Hypotheses: 
A. seeded plants do better in grazed than ungrazed
B. seasonal grazed intermediate for seeded
C. Seasonal and regular grazing similar effect on mustard
D. Grazed treatment less viaual obastruction, lower yeield, less thatch, less veg height, less mustard, less YST, More natives
E. Grazing beneficial to natives over grazed.


2025-08-08
A. Turns out the native AG is ELTR which is a native rye grass.  
    few occurrances in 2025 and one eariler year on small set of plots.  drop or keep?


2025-08-10
A. SHould always show the grazing treatments Plot.  for all experiments.
B. plot treatment (mowed, etc) for the target data)
C. subtreatment effect driven by scraping or mowing?
D. show individual treatments / plots for the targetdata


2025-08-21 
Outline for analyses/results


1. Plant community analyses (‘Methods’)
A. Data collection types and methods
B. Analysis methods

2. Invasive weed cover response (‘Results’)
A. List figure / tables
B. HIIN (density, cover) - note: no pre-data but can look at trend in trt vs control
C. CESO (density)
D. Weeds functional group
 
3. Native plant and wildlife habitat response (‘Results’)
A. List figure / tables
B. Thatch height / fuels
C. Vegetation height
D. Visual obstruction
E. Bareground
 

4. Overall plant community responses (‘Results’)
A. List figure / tables
B. Composition
E. Yield
 
 
2025-08-26
Questions:

1. MustardCovr_pct <int>, OR MustardDens_m2 <dbl>,  RUN THEM BOTH !!!
2. YStarDens_m2 has lots of zeros - probably not great to model - presence absence?
3. Need to add Ripgut to highly invasive grasses and forbes - BB pull from community data.  Red Brome as well?
4. Split out the functional groups into groupings - non-desireable highly invasive vs the ones that are OK forage
  erodium desireable and YST undesireable.
  A. LR and DR will redo the groups and BB will rerun.
  B. BB Send DR the most recent fxl group list.
5. add the four native seeded for analysis.
6. drop thatch_ac
